The Lord of Laṅkā was then immediately awakened [from his reflection], feeling a revulsion (parāvṛtti)
in his mind and realising that the world was nothing but his own mind: he was settled
in the realm of non-discrimination, was urged by the stock of his past good deeds,
acquired the cleverness of understanding all the texts, obtained the faculty of seeing things
as they are, was no more dependent upon others, observed things excellently with his own
wisdom (buddhi), gained the insight that was not of discursive reasoning, was no more dependent
upon others,1 became a great Yogin of the discipline, was able to manifest himself
in all excellent forms, got thoroughly acquainted with all skilful means, had the knowledge
of the characteristic aspects of every stage, by which he would surmount it skilfully,
was delighted to look into2 the self-nature of Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, got a view whereby
he could cut himself loose from the triple continuation, had the knowledge of disposing
of every argument of (10) the philosophers on causation, thoroughly understood the Tathāgata-garbha,
the stage of Buddhahood, the inmost self, found himself abiding in the Buddha-knowledge;
[when suddenly] a voice was heard from the sky, saying, “It is to be known by
oneself.”“Well done, well done, Lord of Laṅkā! Well done, indeed, Lord of Laṅkā, for once
more! The Yogin is to discipline himself as thou doest. The Tathāgatas and all things are
to be viewed as they are viewed by thee; otherwise viewed, it is nihilism.All things are to
be comprehended by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Vijñāna as is done by thee. Thou shouldst
look inwardly and not become attached to the letter and a superficial view of things;thou
shouldst not fall into the attainments, conceptions, experiences, views, and Samādhis
of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; thou shouldst not have any liking
for small talk and witticism;thou shouldst not cherish the notion of self-substance,3 nor
have any thought for the vainglory of rulership, nor dwell on such Dhyānas as belong to the
six Dhyānas, etc. “Lord of Laṅkā, this is the realisation of the great Yogins: to destroy
the discourses advanced by others, to crush mischievous views in pieces, to keep themselves
properly away from ego-centered notions, to cause a revulsion in the depths of the mind
fittingly by means of an exquisite knowledge. Such are sons of the Buddha who walk in the
way of the Mahāyāna. In order to enter upon the stage of self-realisation as attained by
the Tathāgatas, the discipline is to be pursued by thee.“Lord of Laṅkā, conducting thyself
in this manner, let thee be further purified in the way thou hast attained; (11) by disciplining
thyself well in Samādhi and Samāpatti, follow not the state realised and enjoyed
by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, which rises from the imagination of those
who discipline themselves according to the practices of the puerile philosophers. They
cling to the individual forms of the world created by their egotistical ideas; they maintain
such notions as element, quality, and substance; they cling tenaciously to views originating
from ignorance; they become confused by cherishing the idea of birth where prevails
emptiness; they cling to discrimination [as real]; they fall into the way of thinking where
obtains [the dualism of] qualifying and qualified.“Lord of Laṅkā, this is what leads to
various excellent attainments, this is what makes one grow aware of the inmost attainment,
this is the Mahāyāna realisation. This will result in the acquirement of an excellent condition
of existence. “Lord of Laṅkā, by entering upon the Mahāyāna discipline the veils [of
ignorance] are destroyed, and one turns away from the multitudinous waves of the Vijñāna
and falls not into the refuge and practice of the philosophers.“Lord of Laṅkā, the philosophers'
practice starts from their own egotistic attachments. Their ugly practice arises
from adhering to dualistic views concerning the self-nature of the Vijñāna. “Well done, Lord
of Laṅkā; reflect on the signification of this as you did when seeing the Tathāgata before;
for this, indeed, is seeing the Tathāgata.”

At that time it occurred to Rāvaṇa: “I wish to see the Blessed One again, who has all the disciplinary
practices at his command, who has turned away from the practices of the philosophers,
who is born of the state of realisation in the inmost consciousness, and who is beyond
[the dualism of] the transformed and the transforming. He is the knowledge (12) realised
by the Yogins, he is the realisation attained by those who enjoy the perfect bliss of the
Samādhi which they gain by coming to an intuitive understanding through meditation.May
I see thus [again] the Compassionate One by means of his miraculous powers in whom the fuel
of passion and discrimination is destroyed, who is surrounded by sons of the Buddha, who
has penetrated into the minds and thoughts of all beings, who moves about everywhere, who
knows everything, who keeps himself away from work (kriyā) and form (lakṣana); seeing him
may I attain what I have not yet attained, [retain] what I have already gained, may I conduct
myself with non-discrimination, abide in the joy of Samādhi and Samāpatti, and attain
the ground where the Tathāgatas walk, and in these make progress.”

At that moment, the Blessed One recognising that the Lord of Laṅkā is to attain the Anutpattikadharmakshanti
showed his glorious compassion for the ten-headed one by making himself visible
once more on the mountain-peak studded with many jewels and enveloped in a net-work
of jewels.The ten-headed King of Laṅkā saw the splendour again as seen before on the mountain-peak,
[he saw] the Tathāgata, who was the Arhat and the Fully-Enlightened One, with the
thirty-two marks of excellence beautifully adorning his person, and also saw himself on
each mountain-peak, together with Mahāmati, in front of the Tathāgata, the Fully-Enlightened
One, putting forward his discourse on the realisation experienced by the Tathāgata in
his inmost self, and, surrounded by the Yakshas, conversing on the verbal teachings and stories
[of the Buddha]. Those (13) [Buddha]-lands were seen with the Leaders.4

Then the Blessed One beholding again this great assembly with his wisdom-eye, which is not the
human eye, laughed loudly and most vigorously like the lion-king. Emitting rays of light
from the tuft of hair between the eyebrows, from the ribs, from the loins, from the Srivatsa5
on the breast, and from every pore of the skin, — emitting rays of light which shone
flaming like the fire taking place at the end of a kalpa, like a luminous rainbow, like the
rising sun, blazing brilliantly, gloriously—which were observed from the sky by Śakra,
Brahma, and the guardians of the world, the one who sat on the peak [of Laṅkā] vying with
Mount Sumeru laughed the loudest laugh.At that time the assembly of the Bodhisattvas together
with Śakra and Brahma, each thought within himself: “For what reason, I wonder, from what
cause does the Blessed One who is the master of all the world (sarva-dharma-vaśavartin),
after smiling first,6 laugh the loudest laugh? Why does he emit rays of light from his
own body? Why, emitting [rays of light], does he remain silent, with the realisation [of the
Truth] in his inmost self, and absorbed deeply and showing no surprise in the bliss of
Samādhi, and reviewing the [ten] quarters, looking around like the lion-king, and thinking
only of the discipline, attainment, and performance of Rāvaṇa?”

At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva who was previously requested by Rāvaṇa [to
ask the Buddha concerning his self-realisation], feeling pity on him, (14) and knowing the
minds and thoughts of the assembly of the Bodhisattvas, and observing that beings to be
born in the future would be confused in their minds because of their delight in the verbal
teaching (desanapatha), because of their clinging to the letter as [fully in accordance with]
the spirit (artha), because of their clinging to the disciplinary powers of the Śrāvakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, —which might lead them to think how it were that the
Tathāgatas, the Blessed Ones, even in their transcendental state of consciousness should
burst out into loudest laughter—Mahāmati the Bodhisattva asked the Buddha in order to put
a stop to their inquisitiveness the following question: “For what reason, for what cause
did this laughter take place?”Said the Blessed One: “Well done, well done, Mahāmati! Well
done, indeed, for once more, Mahāmati! Viewing the world as it is in itself and wishing to
enlighten the people in the world who are fallen into a wrong view of things in the past,
present, and future, thou undertakest to ask me the question.Thus should it be with the
wise men who want to ask questions for both themselves and others. Rāvaṇa, Lord of Laṅkā,
O Mahāmati, asked a twofold question of the Tathāgatas of the past who are Arhats and perfect
Buddhas;and he wishes now to ask me too a twofold question in order to have its distinction,
attainment, and scope ascertained—this is what is never tasted by those who practise
the meditation of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; and the same will be
asked by the question-loving ten-headed one of the Buddhas to come.”

Knowing that, the Blessed One said to the Lord of Laṅkā, thus: “Ask, thou Lord of Laṅkā; the
Tathāgata has given thee permission [to ask], delay not, whatever questions thou desirest
to have answered, I will answer each of them (15) with judgment to the satisfaction of your
heart.Keeping thy seat of thought free from [false] discrimination, observe well what is
to be subdued at each stage; ponder things with wisdom; [seeing into] the nature of the
inner principle in thyself, abide in the bliss of Samādhi; embraced by the Buddhas in Samādhi,
abide in the bliss of tranquillisation; going beyond the Samādhi and understanding attained
by the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, abide in [the attainment of the Bodhisattvas]
in the stages of Acala, Sadhumati, and Dharmamegha; grasp well the egolessness of all things
in its true significance; be anointed by the Buddhas in Samādhi at the great palace of
lotus-jewels.7Surrounded by the Bodhisattvas who are sitting on lotuses of various sorts each
supported by the gracious power of the Buddhas, thou shalt find thyself sitting on a lotus
and each one of the Bodhisattvas looking at thee face to face. This is a realm beyond
the imagination.Thou shouldst plan out an adequate plan and establish thyself at a stage
of discipline by planning out such a plan as shall include [all kinds of] skilful means, so
that thou comest to realise that realm which is beyond imagination; and thou shouldst attain
the stage of Tathāgatahood in which one is able to manifest oneself in various forms,
and which is something never seen before by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, philosophers,
Brahma, Indra, Upendra, and others.”

At that moment the Lord of Laṅkā being permitted by the Blessed One, rose from his seat on the
peak of the jewel-mountain which shone like the jewel-lotus immaculate and shining in splendour;
he was surrounded by a large company of celestial maidens, and all kinds of garlands,
flowers, perfumes, incense, unguents, umbrellas, banners, fiags, necklaces, half-necklaces,
diadems, tiaras, (16) and other ornaments whose splendour and excellence were never
heard of or seen before, were created; music was played surpassing anything that could be
had by the gods, Nagas, Yakshas, Rākshasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, and men; musical
instruments were created equal to anything that could be had in all the world of desire
and also such superior musical instruments were created as were to be seen in the Buddha-lands;
the Blessed One and the Bodhisattvas were enveloped in a net of jewels; a variety
of dresses and high banners was made rising high in the air as high as seven tala trees
to great [the Buddha], showering great clouds of offerings, playing music which resounded
[all around], and then descending from the air, [the Lord of Laṅkā] sat down on the peak of
the jewel-mountain ornamented with magnificent jewel-lotus whose splendour was second only
to the sun and lightning.Sitting he made courtesy smiling first to the Blessed One for
his permission and proposed him a twofold question: “It was asked of the Tathāgatas of the
past, who were Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, and it was solved by them. Blessed One, now
I ask of thee;[the request] will certainly be complied with by thee as far as verbal instruction
is concerned8 as it was by the Buddhas [of the past]. Blessed One, duality was discoursed
upon by the Transformed Tathāgatas and Tathāgatas of Trans-formation, but not by
the Tathāgatas of Silence.9The Tathāgatas of Silence are absorbed in the blissful state of
Samādhi, they do not discriminate concerning this state, nor do they discourse on it. Blessed
One, thou assuredly wilt discourse on this subject of duality. Thou art thyself a master
of all things, an Arhat, a Tathāgata. The sons of the Buddha and myself are anxious to
listen to it.”

The Blessed One said, “Lord of Laṅkā, tell me what you mean by duality?” The Lord of the Rākshasas,
(17) who was renewed in his ornaments, full of splendour and beauty, with a diadem,
bracelet, and necklace strung with vajra thread, said, “It is said that even dharmas are
to be abandoned, and how much more adharmas. Blessed One, why does this dualism exist that
we are called upon to abandon? What are adharmas? and what are dharmas? How can there be
a duality of things to abandon—a duality that arises from falling into discrimination, from
discriminating self-substance where there is none, from [the idea of] things created (bhautika)
and uncreated, because the non-differentiating nature of the Ālayavijñāna is not
recognised? Like the seeing of a hair-circle as really existing in the air, [the notion of
dualism] belongs to the realm of intellection not exhaustively pur-gated. This being the.
case as it should be, how could there be any abandonment [of dharmas and adharmas]?”

Said the Blessed One, “Lord of Laṅkā, seest thou not that the differentiation of things, such
as is perceived in jars and other breakable objects whose nature it is to perish in time,
takes place in a realm of discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant? This being so, is
it not to be so understood?It is due to discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant that there
exists the differentiation of dharma and adharma. Noble wisdom (āryajñāna), however, is
not to be realised by seeing [things this way]. Lord of Laṅkā, let it be so with the ignorant
who follow the particularised aspect of existence that there are such objects as jars,
etc., but it is not so with the wise. One flame of uniform nature rises up depending on
houses, mansions, parks, and terraces, and burns them down; while a difference in the flames
is seen according to the power of each burning material which varies in length, magnitude,
etc.This being so, why (18) is it not to be so understood? The duality of dharma and
adharma thus comes into existence. Not only is there seen a fire-flame spreading out in one
continuity and yet showing a variety of flames, but from one seed, Lord of Laṅkā, are produced,
also in one continuity, stems, shoots, knots, leaves, petals, flowers, fruit, branches,
all individualised.As it is with every external object from which grows [a variety of]
objects, so also with internal objects. From ignorance there develop the Skandhas, Dhātus,
Āyatanas, with all kinds of objects accompanying, which grow out in the triple world where
we have, as we see, happiness, form, speech, and behaviour, each differentiating [infinitely].
The oneness of the Vijñāna is grasped variously according to the evolution of an
objective world; thus there are seen things inferior, superior, and middling, things defiled
and free from defilement, things good and bad.Not only, Lord of Laṅkā, is there such a
difference of conditions in things generally, there is also seen a variety of realisations
attained innerly by each Yogin as he treads the path of discipline which constitutes his
practice. How much more difference in dharma and adharma do we not see in a world of particulars
which is evolved by discrimination? Indeed, we do.

“Lord of Laṅkā, the differentiation of dharma and adharma comes from discrimination. Lord of
Laṅkā, what are dharmas? That is, they are discriminated by the discriminations cherished
by the philosophers, Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and ignorant people. They think that the
dharmas headed by quality and substance are produced by causes—[these are the notions] to
be abandoned.Such are not to be regarded [as real] because they are appearances (lakṣana).
It comes from one's clinging [to appearances] that the manifestations of his own Mind are
regarded as reality (Dharmatā). (19) Such things as jars, etc., are products of discrimination
conceived by the ignorant, they exist not; their substances are not attainable. The
viewing of things from this viewpoint is known as their abandonment.

“What, then, are adharmas? Lord of Laṅkā, [dharmas] are unattainable as to their selfhood, they
are not appearances born of discrimination, they are above causality; there is in them
no such [dualistic] happening as is seen as reality and non-reality. This is known as the
abandoning of dharmas.What again is meant by the unattainability of dharmas? That is, it
is like horns of a hare, or an ass, or a camel, or a horse, or a child conceived by a barren
woman. They are dharmas the nature of which is unattainable; they are not to be thought
[as real] because they are appearances. They are only talked about in popular parlance if
they have any sense at all; they are not to be adhered to as in the case of jars, etc.As
these [unrealities] are to be abandoned as not comprehensible by the mind (Vijñāna), so are
things (bhava) of discrimination also to be abandoned.This is called the abandoning of dharmas
and adharmas. Lord of Laṅkā, your question as to the way of abandoning dharmas and
adharmas is hereby answered.

“Lord of Laṅkā, thou sayest again that thou hast asked [this question] of the Tathāgatas of
the past who were Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones and that it was solved by them. Lord of
Laṅkā, that which is spoken of as the past belongs to discrimination;as the past is thus
a discriminated [idea], even so are the [ideas] of the future and the present. Because of
reality (Dharmatā) the Tathāgatas do not discriminate, they go beyond discrimination and
futile reasoning, they do not follow (20) the individuation-aspect of forms (rupa)except when
[reality] is disclosed for the edification of the unknowing and for the sake of their
happiness.10 It is by transcendental wisdom (prajna) that the Tathāgata performs deeds transcending
forms (animittacara); therefore, what constitutes the Tathāgatas in essence as well
as in body is wisdom (jñāna). They do not discriminate, nor are they discriminated.Wherefore
do they not discriminate the Manas? Because discrimination is of the self, of soul,
of personality.How do they not discriminate? The Manovijñāna is meant for the objective world
where causality prevails as regards forms, appearances, conditions, and figures.Therefore,
discrimination and non-discrimination must be transcended.

“Lord of Laṅkā, beings are appearances, they are like figures painted on the wall, they have
no sensibility [or consciousness]. Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is devoid of work
and action because all things have no reality,and there is nothing heard, nothing hearing.
Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is like an image magically transformed. This
is not comprehended by the philosophers and the ignorant.Lord of Laṅkā, he who thus sees things,
is the one who sees truthfully. Those who see things otherwise walk in discrimination;as
they depend on discrimination, they cling to dualism. It is like seeing one's own image
reflected in a mirror, or one's own shadow in the water, or in the moonlight, or seeing
one's shadow in the house, or hearing an echo in the valley.People grasping their own shadows
of discrimination (21) uphold the discrimination of dharma and adharma and, failing
to carry out the abandonment of the dualism, they go on discriminating and never attain tranquillity.By
tranquillity is meant oneness (ekāgra), and oneness gives birth to the highest
Samādhi, which is gained by entering into the womb of Tathāgatahood, which is the realm
of noble wisdom realised in one's inmost self.”

The First Chapter Called “Rāvaṇa Asking for Instruction.”11

[CHAPTER TWO]

