4. After seven nights, the Blessed One leaving the ocean which is the abode of the Makara, the
palace of the sea-king, now stands on the shore.

5. Just as the Buddha rises, Rāvaṇa, accompanied by the Apsaras and Yakshas numerous, by Suka,
Sarana, and learned men,

6. Miraculously goes over to the place where the Lord is standing. Alighting from the floral
vehicle, he greets the Tathāgata reverentially, makes him offerings, tells him who he is,
and stands by the Lord.

7. “I who have come here, am called Rāvaṇa, the ten-headed king of the Rākshasas, mayest thou
graciously receive me with Laṅkā and all its residents.

8. “In this city, the inmost state of consciousness realised, indeed, by the Enlightened Ones
of the past (5) was disclosed on this peak studded with precious stones.

9. “Let the Blessed One, too. surrounded by sons of the Victorious One, now disclose the Truth
immaculate on this peak embellished with precious stones; we, together with the residents
of Laṅkā, desire to listen.

10. “The Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra which is praised by the Buddhas of the past [discloses] the inmost
state of consciousness realised by them, which is not founded on any system of doctrine.

11. “I recollect the Buddhas of the past surrounded by sons of the Victorious One recite this
sūtra; the Blessed One, too, will speak.

12. “In the time to come, there will be Buddhas and Buddha-Sons pitying the Yakshas; the Leaders
will discourse on this magnificent doctrine on the peak adorned with precious stones.

13. “This magnificent city of Laṅkā is adorned with varieties of precious stones, [surrounded]
by peaks, refreshing and beautiful and canopied by a net of jewels.

14. “Blessed One, here are the Yakshas who are free from faults of greed, reflecting on [the
Truth] realised in one's inmost self and making offerings to the Buddhas of the past; they
are believers in the teaching of the Mahāyāna and intent on disciplining one another.

15. “There are younger Yakshas, girls and boys, desiring to know the Mahāyāna. Come, Blessed
One, who art our Teacher, come to Laṅkā on Mount Malaya.

16. (6) “The Rākshasas, with Kumbhakarṇa at their head, who are residing in the city, wish,
as they are devoted to the Mahāyāna, to hear about this inmost realisation.

17. “They have made offerings assiduously to the Buddhas [in the past] and are to-day going
to do the same. Come, for compassion's sake, to the Laṅkā, together with [thy] sons.

18. “Mahāmati, accept my mansion, the company of the Apsaras, necklaces of various sorts, and
the delightful Aśoka garden.

19. “I give myself up to serve the Buddhas and their sons; there is nothing with me that I do
not give up [for their sake]; Great Muni, have compassion on me!”

20. Hearing him speak thus, the Lord of the Triple World said, “King of Yakshas, this mountain
of precious stones was visited by the Leaders in the past.

21. “And, taking pity on you, they discoursed on the Truth revealed in their inmost [consciousness].
[The Buddhas of] the future time will proclaim [the same] on this jewel-adorned mountain.

22. “This [inmost Truth] is the abode of those Yogins who stand in the presence of the Truth.
King of the Yakshas, you have the compassion of the Sugatas and myself.”

23. The Blessed One accepting the request [of the King] remained silent and undisturbed; he
now mounted the floral chariot offered by Rāvaṇa.

24. Thus Rāvaṇa and others, wise sons of the Victorious One, (7) honoured by the Apsaras singing
and dancing, reached the city.

25. Arriving in the delightful city [the Buddha was] again the recipient of honours; he was
honoured by the group of Yakshas including Rāvaṇa and by the Yaksha women.

26. A net of jewels was offered to the Buddha by the younger Yakshas, girls and boys, and necklaces
beautifully ornamented with jewels were placed by Rāvaṇa about the neck of the Buddha
and those of the sons of the Buddha.1

27. The Buddhas together with the sons of the Buddha and the wise men, accepting the offerings,
discoursed on the Truth which is the state of consciousness realised in the inmost self.

28. Honouring [him as] the best speaker, Rāvaṇa and the company of the Yakshas honoured Mahāmati
and requested of him again and again:2

29. “Thou art the asker of the Buddha concerning the state of consciousness realised in their
inmost selves, of which we here, Yakshas as well as the sons of the Buddha, are desirous
of hearing. I, together with the Yakshas, the sons of the Buddha, and the wise men, request
this of thee.

30. “Thou art the most eloquent of speakers, and the most strenuous of the Yogins; with faith
I beg of thee. Ask [the Buddha] about the doctrine, O thou the proficient one!

31. “Free from the faults of the philosophers and Pratyekabuddhas and Śrāvakas is (8) the Truth
of the inmost consciousness, immaculate and culminating in the stage of Buddhahood.”

32.3 Thereupon the Blessed One created jewel-adorned mountains and other objects magnificently
embellished with jewels in an immense number.

33. On the summit of each mountain the Buddha himself was visible, and Rāvaṇa, the Yaksha, also
was found standing there.

34. Thus the entire assembly was seen on each mountain-peak, and all the countries Were there,
and in each there was a Leader.

35. Here also was the King of the Rākshasas and the residents of Laṅkā, and the Laṅkā created
by the Buddha rivaling [the real one].

36. Other things were there, too, —the Aśoka with its shining woods, and on each mountain-peak
Mahāmati was making a request of the Buddha,

37. Who discoursed for the sake of the Yakshas on the Truth leading to the inmost realisation;
on the mountain-peak he delivered a complete sūtra with an exquisite voice varied in hundreds
of thousands of ways.4

38. [After this] the teacher and the sons of the Buddha vanished away in the air, leaving Rāvaṇa
the Yaksha himself standing [above] in his mansion.

39. Thought he, “How is this? What means this? and by whom was it heard? What was it that was
seen? and by whom was it seen? Where is the city? and where is the Buddha?

40. “Where are those countries, those jewel-shining Buddhas, those Sugatas? (9) Is it a dream
then? or a vision? or is it a castle conjured up by the Gandharvas?

41. “Or is it dust in the eye, or a fata morgana, or the dream-child of a barren woman, or the
smoke of a fire-wheel, that which I saw here?”

42. Then [Rāvaṇa reflected], “This is the nature as it is (Dharmatā) of all things, which belongs
to the realm of Mind, and it is not comprehended by the ignorant as they are confused
by every form of imagination.

43. “There is neither the seer nor the seen, neither the speaker nor the spoken; the form and
usage of the Buddha and his Dharma—they are nothing but discrimination.

44. “Those who see things such as were seen before, do not see the Buddha; [even] when discrimination
is not aroused, one does not see5 the Buddha; the Buddha being fully-enlightened
is seen where the world itself is not evolved.

