99 Like waves that rise on the ocean stirred by the wind, dancing and without interruption,

100 The Ālaya-ocean in a similar manner is constantly stirred by the winds of objectivity, and
is seen dancing about with the Vijñānas which are the waves of multiplicity.

101 Dark-blue, red, [and other colours], with salt, conch-shell, milk, honey, fragrance of fruits
and flowers, and rays of sunlight;

102 They are neither different nor not-different: the relation is like that between the ocean
and its waves. So are the seven Vijñānas joined with the Citta (mind).

103 As the waves in their variety are stirred on the ocean, so in the Ālaya is produced the
variety of what is known as the Vijñānas.

104 The Citta, Manas, and Vijñānas are discriminated as regards their form; [but in substance]
the eight are not to be separated one from another, for there is neither qualified nor
qualifying.

105 As there is no distinction between the ocean and its waves, so in the Citta there is no
evolution of the Vijñānas.

106 Karma is accumulated by the Citta, reflected upon by the Manas, and recognised by the Manovijñāna,
and the visible world is discriminated by the five Vijñānas.

(47) 107 Varieties of colour such as dark-blue, etc., are presented to our Vijñāna. Tell me,
Great Muni, how there are these varieties of colour like waves [on the ocean]?

108 There are no such varieties of colour in the waves; it is for the sake of the simple-minded
that the Citta is said to be evolving as regards form.

109 There is no such evolving in the Citta itself, which is beyond comprehension. Where there
is comprehension there is that which comprehends as in the case of waves [and ocean].

110 Body, property, and abode are presented as such to our Vijñānas, and thus they are seen
as evolving in the same way as are the waves.

111 The ocean is manifestly seen dancing in the state of waveness; how is it that the evolving
of the Ālaya is not recognised by the intellect even as the ocean is?1

112 That the Ālaya is compared to the ocean is [only] for the sake of the discriminating intellect
of the ignorant; the likeness of the waves in motion is [only] brought out by way of
illustration.

113 When the sun rises it shines impartially on people high and low; so thou who art the light
of the world shouldst announce the truth (tattvam) to the ignorant.

(48) 114 How is it that in establishing thyself in the Dharma thou announcest not the truth?
If the truth is announced by me, the truth is not in the mind.2

115 As the waves appear instantly on the ocean, or [images] in a mirror or a dream, so the mind
is reflected in its own sense-fields.3

116 Owing to a deficiency in conditions the evolution [of the Vijñānas] takes place by degrees.4
The function of the Manovijñāna is to recognise and that of the Manas is to reflect upon,

117 While to the five Vijñānas the actual world presents itself. There is no gradation when
one is in a state of collectedness (samāhita).5 Like unto a master of painting or his pupils,

1186 Who arrange colours to produce a picture, I teach. The picture is not in the colours, nor
in the canvas, nor in the plate;

119 In order to make it attractive to all beings, a picture is presented in colours. What one
teaches, transgresses; for the truth (tattva) is beyond words.

120 Establishing myself in the Dharma, I preach the truth for the Yogins. The truth is the state
of self-realisation and is beyond categories of discrimination.

121 I teach it to the sons of the Victorious; the teaching is not meant for the ignorant. What
is seen as multitudinous is a vision which exists not.

122 The teaching itself is thus variously given, subject to transgression; (49) the teaching
is no teaching whatever if it is not to the point in each case.

123 According to the nature of a disease the healer gives its medicine; even so the Buddhas
teach beings in accordance with their mentalities.

124 This is indeed not a mental realm to be reached by the philosophers and the Śrāvakas; what
is taught by the leaders is the realm of self-realisation.

