76. How many atoms are there in a mustard-seed? How many mustard-seeds are there in a rakshika?
How many in a bean, in a dharana, in a mashaka?

77. How many dharanas are there in a karsha? How many karshas in a pala? and how many palas
are there in Mount Sumeru which is a huge accumulation [of masses]?

78. You should ask me thus, O son! Why do you ask me otherwise? How many atoms are there in
the body of a Pratyekabuddha, of a Śrāvaka, of a Buddha, and of a Bodhisattva? (32) Why do
you not ask me in this wise?

79. How many atoms are there at the top of a flame? How many atoms are in the wind? How many
in each sense-organ? How many in a pore of the skin? in the eyebrows?

80. Whence are these men of immense wealth, kings, great sovereigns? How is the kingdom taken
care of by them? And how about their emancipation?

81. Tell whence is prose and metre. Why is sexual desire universally cherished? Whence is the
variety of foods and drinks? Whence the man-woman forest?

82. Wherefore are the mountains of Vajrasamhanana? Tell me whence, wherefore; are they like
a vision, a dream, and a fata-morgana?1

83. Whence is the arising of clouds? And whence do the seasons rise? Whence is the nature of
taste? Whence is woman, man, and hermaphrodite?

84. Whence are the adornments and the Bodhisattvas? Ask me, O my son! Whence are the divine
mountains embellished by the Rishis and Gandharvas?

85. Whence is the way of emancipation? Who is in bondage? By whom is he delivered? What is the
state of one who practises tranquillisation? What is transformation, and who are those
philosophers?

86. What is meant by non-existence, existence, and no-effect? Whence arises the visible world?
(33) How can one be cleansed of false intellection? Whence does false intellection arise?

87. Whence arises action? And whence its departure? Tell me. How does the extinction of thought
take place? And what is meant by a Samādhi?

88. Who is the one that breaks through the triple world? What is the position? What is the body?
Wherefore the doctrine that beings have no ego-soul? What is meant by a teaching in accordance
with the world?1

89. Do you ask me about the marks? Do you ask me about egolessness? Do you ask me about the
womb, about the Nyaya philosophers, O son of the Victor?

90. How about eternalism and nihilism? How is the mind tranquillised? Again [how about] speech,
knowledge, morality, family, O son of the Victor?

91. What is meant by reasoning and illustrating, by master and disciple, by manifoldness of
beings, food and drink, sky, intelligence, evil ones, and the statement that there is nothing
but the thought-constructed?

92. What do you ask me concerning trees and vines, O son of the Victor? What about diversity
of lands, and about Long-Penance the Rishi?2

93. What is your family? Who is your master? You tell me, O son of the Victor. Who are the people
who are despised? How is it that in the Yoga you do not attain enlightenment in the
world of desire, but that in the Akaniṣṭha there is realisation?

94. What do you ask me about reasoning? (34) What about the psychic faculties belonging to this
world, and about the nature of a Bhikshu?

95. Do you ask me about Buddhas of Transformation, Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]? About
Buddhas of the Knowledge of Suchness? And whence is the Bodhisattva?

96. You ask me, O son of the Victor, about the lands that are devoid of light, resembling a
lute, a drum, and a flower, and about the mind abiding in the seven stages?

97. You ask me such and many other questions, which are in accordance with the marks [of Truth?]
and free from erroneous views.

