XXVII At that time again Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva made a request of the Blessed One.Tell
me, Blessed One, how all things are empty, unborn, non-dual, and have no self-nature,
so that I and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas might be awakened in the teaching of emptiness,
no-birth, non-duality, and the absence of self-nature, and, quitting the discrimination
of being and non-being, quickly realise the highest enlightenment.

Then the Blessed One said this to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva: Now, Mahāmati, listen
well and reflect well upon what I tell you.Replied Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva, I
will indeed, Blessed One.(74) The Blessed One said: Emptiness, emptiness, indeed! Mahāmati,
it is a term whose self-nature is false imagination.Because of one's attachment to false
imagination, Mahāmati, we have to talk of emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and absence
of self-nature.In short, then, Mahāmati, there are seven kinds of emptiness: (1) The emptiness
of individual marks (lakṣana), (2) the emptiness of self-nature (bhavaSvabhāva), (3)
the emptiness of no-work (apracarita), (4) the emptiness of work (pracarita), (5) the emptiness
of all things in the sense that they are unpredicable (nirabhilapya), (6) the emptiness
in its highest sense of ultimate reality realisable only by noble wisdom, and (7) the
emptiness of mutuality (itaretara) which is the seventh.

Mahāmati, what then is the emptiness of individual marks? It is that all things have no [such
distinguishing] marks of individuality and generality.In consideration of mutuality and
accumulation, [things are thought to be realities], but when they are further investigated
and analysed, Mahāmati, they are non-existent, and not predicable with individuality and
generality;and because thus no such ideas as self, other, or both, hold good, Mahāmati, the
individual marks no longer obtain.So it is said that all things are empty as to their self-marks.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of self-nature? Mahāmati, it is that all things
in their self-nature are unborn, hence the emptiness of self-nature,and it is therefore
said that things are empty in their self-nature.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of no-work? It is that the Skandhas are Nirvāṇa
itself and there is no work doing in them from the beginning.Therefore, one speaks of
the emptiness of no-work.

(75) Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of work? It is that the Skandhas are devoid
of an ego and its belongings, and go on functioning when there is a mutual conjunction
of cause and action.Thus one speaks of the emptiness of work.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of all things in the sense that they are unpredicable?
It is that the nature of the false imagination is not expressible, hence the emptiness
of all things in the sense of their unpredicability.Thus one speaks of the emptiness
of unpredicability.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness in its highest sense of ultimate reality realisable
by noble wisdom? It is that in the attainment of an inner realisation by means of
noble wisdom there is no trace of habit-energy generated by all the erroneous conceptions
[of beginningless past].Thus one speaks of the highest emptiness of ultimate reality realisable
by noble wisdom.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of mutual [non-existence]? It is this: when
a thing is missing here, one speaks of its being empty there.For instance, Mahāmati, in the
lecture-hall of the Mrigarama there are no elephants, no bulls, no sheep, but as to the
Bhikshus I can say that the hall is not devoid of them;it is empty only as far as they [i.e.
the animals] are concerned.Further, Mahāmati, it is not that the lecture-hall is devoid
of its own characteristics, nor that the Bhikshu is devoid of this Bhikshuhood, nor that
in some other places, too, elephants, bulls, and sheep are not to be found.Mahāmati, here
one sees all things in their aspect of individuality and generality, but from the point of
view of mutuality (itaretara) some things do not exist somewhere.Thus one speaks of the emptiness
of mutual [non-existence].

These, Mahāmati, are the seven kinds of emptiness of which mutuality ranks the lowest of all
and is to be put away by you.

(76) Again, Mahāmati, not that things are not born, but that they are not born of themselves,
except when seen in the state of Samādhi—this is what is meant by “all things are unborn."To
have no self-nature is, according to the deeper sense, to be unborn, Mahāmati.That all
things are devoid of self-nature means that there is a constant and uninterrupted becoming,
a momentary change from one state of existence to another; seeing this, Mahāmati, all
things are destitute of self-nature.So one speaks of all things having no self-nature.

Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by non-duality? It means that light and shade, long and short,
black and white, are relative terms, Mahāmati, and not independent of each other;as Nirvāṇa
and Samsara are, all things are not-two.There is no Nirvāṇa except where is Samsara;there
is no Samsara except where is Nirvāṇa; for the condition of existence is not of mutually-exclusive
character.1Therefore, it is said that all things are non-dual as are Nirvāṇa
and Samsara.For this reason, Mahāmati, you should discipline yourself in [the realisation
of] emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and no-self-nature.

Then at that time the Blessed One recited this couplet of verses:137 I always preach emptiness
which is beyond eternalism and nihilism; Samsara is like a dream and a vision, and karma
vanishes not.

138 Space, Nirvāṇa, and the two forms of cessation— thus (77) the ignorant discriminate the
things which are not effect-producing, but the wise stand above being and non-being.

At that time again, the Blessed One said this to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva:This [teaching
of] emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and no-self-nature is found in all the sūtras
of all the Buddhas, and this doctrine is recognised in every one of them.However, Mahāmati,
the sūtras are the teaching in conformity with the dispositions of all beings and deviate
from the [real] sense, and not the truth-preserving statement.Mahāmati, it is like unto
the mirage which entices the deer with its treacherous springs, the springs are not there
but the deer are attached, imagining them to be real.So with the teachings disclosed in
all the sūtras, they are for all beings for the gratification of their own discriminating
minds.They are not the truth-preserving statements meant for noble wisdom to grasp.For this
reason, Mahāmati, be in conformity with the sense and be not engrossed in the word-teaching.

