26. What are the elements of enlightenment? Whence are the constituents of enlightenment? Wherefore
is a revolution, and the disturbance of a kingdom? And how does the realistic view
of existence (bhavadṛṣṭi) take its rise?

27. What is meant by the world being above birth and death? or being like the flower in the
air? How do you understand it? Why do you regard it as being beyond words?

28. How is it not subject to discrimination? How is it like the sky? Of how many sorts is suchness?
How manifold is the Mind? How many Paramitas are there?

29. Whence is the gradation of the stages? What is the state of imagelessness? (26) Wherefore
is the twofold egolessness? How is one cleansed of [the hindrance of] knowledge?

30. Of how many kinds is knowledge (jñāna)? O Leader! How many moral precepts are there? and
forms of being? Whence are the families born of gold and jewel and pearl?

31. Of whom is speech born? Whence is the differentiation of beings? Whence are the sciences,
offices, arts? and by whom are they made manifest?

32. Of how many sorts are Gāthās? What is prose? What is metre? Of how many sorts is reasoning
and exegesis?

33. How many varieties of food and drink are there? Whence does sexual desire originate? Whence
are there kings, sovereigns, and provincial rulers?

34. How does a king protect his dominion? Of how many groups are heavenly beings? Whence are
the earth, stars, constellations, the moon, and the sun?

35. How many kinds of emancipation are there? of the Yogins? How many kinds of discipleship?
And how about the masters?

36. How many kinds of Buddhahood are there? And how many of the Jataka Tales? How numerous are
the evil ones? How numerous are the heretics?

37. What is meant by [the doctrine] that there is nothing but thought-construction? Pray tell
me, thou Most Eloquent One?

(27) 38. Whence are the clouds in the sky? the wind? What is meant by recollection? by wisdom
(medha)? Whence are trees and vines? Pray tell me, Lord of the Triple World?

39. How do horses, elephants, and deer get caught? Wherefore are there fools and despicable
people? Pray tell me, thou Charioteer of the Mind?

40. Wherefore are the six seasons mentioned? What is meant by the Icchantika [one who is without
Buddha-nature]? Pray tell me whence is the birth of a man? of a woman? of a hermaphrodite?

41. How does one retrograde in the Yoga exercises? How does one make progress in them? How many
exercises are there? and how are men kept abiding in them? Pray tell me.

42. Beings are born in the various paths of existence, what are their specific marks and forms?
How is abundance of wealth acquired? Pray tell me, thou who art like the sky?

43. Whence is the Sakya family? And the one born of Ikshvaku? Whence is the Rishi Long-Penance?
What is taught by him?

44. How is it that thou art thus apparent everywhere in every land, surrounded by such Bodhisattvas
of such various names and forms?

45. Why is meat not to be eaten? Why is it forbidden? Whence was the carnivorous race born,
who eats meat?

46. Why are the lands shaped like the moon, the sun, the Sumeru, the lotus, the swatika, and
the lion? Pray tell me.

(28) 47. Wherefore are the lands shaped like a capsized and upturned net of Indra which is composed
of all sorts of jewels? Pray tell me why?

48. Wherefore are [the lands] shaped in the form of a lute or a drum? Like various flowers and
fruits? Like the sun and the moon which are so stainless? Pray tell me.

49. Whence are the Buddhas of Transformation? Whence are the Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]?
Whence are the Buddhas who are endowed with transcendental knowledge of suchness? Pray
tell me.

50. Why does not one attain enlightenment in the world of desire? Pray tell me. What is the
meaning of your being enlightened in the Akaniṣṭha by shaking off all the passions?

