51. After my passing who will be the upholder of the Discipline [or Doctrine, sasana]! How long
should the teacher abide? How long should the teaching continue?

52. How many sorts of established truths are there? And how many of philosophical views? Whence
is morality? And what constitutes the being of a Bhikshu? Pray tell me.

53. What is meant by a state of revulsion [or turning-back]? Whence is a state of imagelessness,
[which is realised] by the Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Śrāvakas?

54. By whom are the psychic powers of this world attained? What are the super-worldly ones?
By what means does the mind enter upon the seven stages? Pray tell me.

55. How many kinds of Brotherhood are there? And how does a dissension take place in a Brotherhood!
Whence are medical treatises for beings? Pray tell me.

(29) 56. You say that you were among the Buddhas Kasyapa, Krakuchanda, and Kanakamuni; tell
me wherefore so, O Great Muni!

57. Whence is the doctrine that there is no ego-soul in beings? Whence is the doctrine of eternity,
and of annihilation? Wherefore do you not everywhere announce the doctrine of Mind-only
as the truth?

58. What is meant by the forest of men and women? And by the forest of Karitaki and Amali? Whence
are the mountains Kailasa, Cakravada, and Vajrasamhanana?

59. Among these, whence are the mountains decorated with various sorts of jewels and filled
with Rishis and Gandharvas? Pray tell me.

60. Hearing this [which constitutes] the wonderful doctrine of the Mahāyāna and also the most
excellent heart of the Buddhas, the Great Hero, the Buddha, the One Most Excelled in the
Knowledge of the World, [spoke thus]:

61. Well done! Well done! O Mahaprajna-Mahāmati! Listen well, and I will tell you in order regarding
your questions.

62. Birth, no-birth, Nirvāṇa, emptiness, transmigration, having-no-sell-nature, Buddhas, sons
of the Paramitas,

63. The Śrāvakas, Bodhisattvas, the philosophers, those who are capable of formless deeds, the
Meru, oceans, mountains, islands, lands, the earth,

64. The stars, the sun, the moon, the philosophers, the Asura, (30) emancipations, the self-masteries,
the psychic faculties, the Dhyānas, the Samādhis,

65. The extinctions (nirodha), the supernatural powers, the elements of enlightenment, and the
paths, Dhyānas, the unmeasurables, the aggregates (skandhas), and the comings-and-goings.

66. Samāpattis, the extinctions, the stirrings of mind, explanations in words, the Citta, Manas,
and Vijñānas, egolessness, the five Dharmas,

67. Self-nature, the discriminating, the discriminated, the visible [world], dualism—whence
are they? Various forms of vehicles, families, those born of gold, jewels, and pearls?

68. The Icchantika, the original elements, the wandering-about, one Buddhahood, knowledge, the
known, the marching, the attainment, and the existence and non-existence of beings?

69. How are horses, elephants, deer caught? Pray tell me how. What is a proposition, a teaching
established by the conjunction of reason and illustration?

70. Whence is cause and effect? Various errors? and also reason? [Why the statement that there
is] nothing but Mind, that there is no objective [literally, seen] world, that there is
no ascending of the stages?

71. Whence is the state of imagelessness and revulsion which is a hundredfold?1 You tell me.
Likewise about medical treatises, arts, crafts, sciences, and teachings? 1

72. And also what are the measurements of the mountains, Sumeru, and the earth? What are the
measurements of the ocean, moon, and sun? Tell me.

(31) 73. How many particles of dust are there in the body of a being? How many of the coarser
ones, of the finer ones, and of the middle ones? How many particles of dust in every land?
How many in every dhanva?

74. In measuring distance how much is a hasta, a dhanu, a krosa, a yojana, a half-yojana? How
many of rabbit-hairs, of window-dust, louse-eggs, or ram-hairs, of barley?1

75. How many grains of barley in a prastha? How many grains of barley in a half-prastha? Likewise
how many in a drona, in a khārya, a laksha, a koti, a vimvana?

